# Hybrid assembly

## PacBio and Oxford Nanopore reads

SPAdes can take as an input an unlimited number of PacBio and Oxford Nanopore libraries.

PacBio CLR and Oxford Nanopore reads are used for hybrid assemblies (e.g. with Illumina or IonTorrent). There is no need to pre-correct this kind of data. SPAdes will use PacBio CLR and Oxford Nanopore reads for gap closure and repeat resolution.

For PacBio you just need to have filtered subreads in FASTQ/FASTA format. Provide these filtered subreads using the `--pacbio` option. Oxford Nanopore reads are provided with `--nanopore` option.

PacBio CCS/Reads of Insert reads or pre-corrected (using third-party software) PacBio CLR / Oxford Nanopore reads can be simply provided as single reads to SPAdes.

## Additional contigs

In case you have contigs of the same genome generated by another assembler(s) and you wish to merge them into SPAdes assembly, you can specify additional contigs using `--trusted-contigs` or `--untrusted-contigs`. First option is used when high quality contigs are available. These contigs will be used for graph construction, gap closure and repeat resolution. Second option is used for less reliable contigs that may have more errors or contigs of unknown quality. These contigs will be used only for gap closure and repeat resolution. The number of additional contigs is unlimited.

Note, that SPAdes does not perform assembly using genomes of closely-related species. Only contigs of the same genome should be specified.

